

I was such a fussy child. I *am* a fussy child, really. I never stopped. I may now have greater capacity to tolerate things, but there is still a child in me that I comfort and care for every day. So I wasn't laughing at the little kid in the zendo that morning, I laughed because I recognized myself.

Jiryu, the abbot leading the dharma talk, said to all the visiting children, "how are you liking it here?" This was at Green Gulch Farm Zen Center, a beautiful place to escape and be held by nature. The week prior I had spent 4 days in silence there, meditating in front of a wall, listening to birds and frogs and my own breathing. The sounds of life had nourished me as I mourned Cal's death and opened my heart to each moment. The birds were me and I was the birds, and this little boy, maybe 5 years old, answered the abbot in the zendo and said "the birds are too loud."

I laughed because he was right. I laughed but I wanted to cry. The birds are too loud, the sun is too bright, the wind is too cold, and all these people are too confusing. I never wanted to be born, and I've been reluctant to engage with life ever since. I've suffered so much over something I had no control over, something that happened without my consent.

I think we all find ourselves in this position, no? Here we find ourselves in this world where things are happening to us and we don't always have control. Often we have to experience bordom or frustration, or even pain, immeasurable pain. We are all prisoners of life, subject to circumstance, all the time, until we die.

We can make ourselves comfortable, sure, but we're still in these bodies. I still have these thoughts and feelings all the time and I can't turn them off. I'll never escape the feeling of my own hands and the blood pumping through them. I'm in this vessel and I can't get out. Have you never wanted to rip your own skin off and fly out into the universe? Blessed are you if you have no idea what I'm talking about. If you don't see that the birds are too loud then you can't even hear your own heartbeat.

Even if that didn't make any sense to you, I'm still sure that you know suffering. We all do. Don't lie, not to yourself. To be human is to know suffering. That's, like, the first noble truth right there. There is suffering. That little boy in the zendo knows it. The birds are too loud.

I realize now that I've spent my whole life living this dilemma. Why haven't I killed myself? Why did Cal? Why are we here and what are we to do about it? I can't say that I know the answers to any of these questions, not with my thinking mind, or even with my feelings, but to say I don't know at all would be wrong too. Actually, we both know the answers. In the awareness beyond thinking and feeling, beyond discrimination, we know. You know what I'm talking about even if you don't know what I'm talking about. You know it like you know the sun on your skin.






Have you ever seen Pokémon? In the TV show they can talk but they don't use any words. They just say their own name over and over again and somehow everyone understands exactly what they mean. Pikachu will just say "pika pika pika," and somehow Ash will know that Pikachu doesn't want to go in the pokéball. It's great. It's any autistic child's dream.

I loved this show as a kid. I wanted to be a pokémon. Not a pokémon trainer— a pokémon. I wanted to be a pokémon so badly that I would stare off into the distance somberly as my heart broke because I was a human and not a pokémon. I wanted the simple life of a pokémon. I wanted to be taken care of. I wanted to be understood without having to say words. I wanted to be free.

Somehow in my little kid mind I associated being a pokémon with freedom. I think I already understood that language was binding me to a world of thinking and judging. To speak at all is to divide the world into concepts, to draw borders around things. I am me and you are you. This is good and that is bad. Once I had language it became very hard to experience the undivided wholeness of the present moment, and I think I mourned that loss, even though I didn't know what I was mourning.